---
title: Social Media in UK Universities Today
layout: post
---

[Last week I published][1] a dataset of [UK University Social Media][3] accounts. Thanks to some feedback from colleagues in other institutions [I decided to expand the scope of the dataset][2], hopefully making it more useful. Now with a fairly substantial block of information at my disposal, I've started to explore it. This is a fairly superficial - yet enlightening - look at how UK Universities are using social media today.

The first chart shows the share of institutions that do and do not use social media. It's likely that the number of universities that do use social media is greater than these figures show because there are almost certainly some social media accounts than have not been included in the dataset. Despite this, it is clear that the majority of institutions have some presence in social media today.

<script type="text/javascript" src="//ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/static/modules/gviz/1.0/chart.js"> {"dataSourceUrl":"//docs.google.com/spreadsheet/tq?key=0AvmGs2D9eZgxdHlPUmt3SFEzUUhiNGQzMjBhajRtUGc&transpose=0&headers=0&range=A13%3AB14&gid=5&pub=1","options":{"vAxes":[{"useFormatFromData":true,"viewWindowMode":"pretty","viewWindow":{}},{"useFormatFromData":true,"viewWindowMode":"pretty","viewWindow":{}}],"pieHole":0,"backgroundColor":"transparent","booleanRole":"certainty","colors":["#6aa84f","#e69138","#FF9900","#109618","#990099","#0099C6","#DD4477","#66AA00","#B82E2E","#316395","#994499","#22AA99","#AAAA11","#6633CC","#E67300","#8B0707","#651067","#329262","#5574A6","#3B3EAC","#B77322","#16D620","#B91383","#F4359E","#9C5935","#A9C413","#2A778D","#668D1C","#BEA413","#0C5922","#743411"],"legend":"bottom","is3D":false,"hAxis":{"useFormatFromData":true},"width":600,"height":371},"state":{},"chartType":"PieChart","chartName":"Chart3"} </script>

The next chart shows how many social media channels institutions are using. The majority of universities have a presence in three or four difference social media spaces, with a significant number just above and below these figures. Again, it is likely that this chart has a slight conservative bias. The slight rise at zero bucks the trend of a normal distribution, implying that HEI presence in social media communities is a little greater than these figures describe.

<script type="text/javascript" src="//ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/static/modules/gviz/1.0/chart.js"> {"dataSourceUrl":"//docs.google.com/spreadsheet/tq?key=0AvmGs2D9eZgxdHlPUmt3SFEzUUhiNGQzMjBhajRtUGc&transpose=0&headers=1&range=A1%3AB9&gid=5&pub=1","options":{"vAxes":[{"title":"Number of Institutions","useFormatFromData":true,"minValue":null,"viewWindowMode":"pretty","gridlines":{"count":"6"},"viewWindow":{"min":null,"max":null},"maxValue":null},{"useFormatFromData":true,"viewWindowMode":"pretty","viewWindow":{}}],"series":{"0":{"color":"#6aa84f"}},"backgroundColor":"transparent","booleanRole":"certainty","animation":{"duration":500},"legend":"none","useFirstColumnAsDomain":true,"hAxis":{"title":"Number of SM Accounts","useFormatFromData":true},"isStacked":false,"width":600,"height":371},"state":{},"view":{"columns":[{"calc":"stringify","type":"string","sourceColumn":0},1]},"chartType":"ColumnChart","chartName":"Chart2"} </script>


Finally I looked at the popularity of different social networks across institutions. Rather unsurprisingly Twitter and Facebook are at the top of the table. YouTube is also fairly popular and Flickr boasts a comfortable presence. I was surprised to see that LinkedIn is as popular as it is and I'm sure that iTunesU will be an interesting space to watch. The tail end are largely specialist and minority services, Google+ among them.

<script type="text/javascript" src="//ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/static/modules/gviz/1.0/chart.js"> {"dataSourceUrl":"//docs.google.com/spreadsheet/tq?key=0AvmGs2D9eZgxdHlPUmt3SFEzUUhiNGQzMjBhajRtUGc&transpose=0&headers=1&range=A1%3AB17&gid=6&pub=1","options":{"vAxes":{"0":{"useFormatFromData":true},"1":{"useFormatFromData":true}}, "backgroundColor":"transparent", "booleanRole":"certainty","animation":{"duration":500},"legend":"none","hAxis":{"useFormatFromData":true,"viewWindowMode":"pretty","viewWindow":{}},"isStacked":false,"width":600,"height":371},"state":{},"chartType":"BarChart","chartName":"Chart3"} </script>

This has been a fairly superficial analysis of the UK University Social Media dataset, but nevertheless has highlighted some interesting points. The majority of institutions recognise the value of using social media, clearly it's a trend that cannot be ignored. Most universities only operate in two, three or four social media communities. I expect that the reasons for this are mainly down to the popularity of a service and the availability of resources in the university to manage an on-line social presence. Also the combination of services being used is interesting. Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and to a lesser extent Flickr, seem to be a complimentary set of services to use.

Of course this analysis can say little about how these services are being used in institutions. Simply having an account doesn't presume that they are being used well. Are they regularly attended to? Is there a strategy guiding their use? Are they used just to push information out or as a two-way communication channels? There are a lot more questions to be asked about how universities in the UK are using social media and embedding it (or not) in to their strategy.


[1]: /2012/05/23/uk-university-social-media-data.html
[2]: /2012/05/24/uk-university-social-media-better-data.html
[3]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AvmGs2D9eZgxdFVfWmFQZ2dNcjhBa2h5aXF2aUtyYWc